It's been a while.
Um, we're very grateful for your hour this morning
so we can discuss the wind down of Crown irrigation assets
and what that looks like for, uh, what we learned
and where we take the country forward in terms
of long-term water storage.
So, um, if you could lead off with a few comments, uh,
there is a lot of questions coming.
Uh, a as you can well imagine from my team of very,
very diligent people, group of people.
So I'll leave it with you.
Okay. Um, yeah, look, it's been a bit of a journey
for Corona Irrigation since it was set up.
We've been in a phase where we've been
refinancing the schemes to extract as much capital
for the Crown in the last few years,
and we're currently in the process of
transferring the remaining loans
and the y me Dan to, um, it'd be, so
that's probably best I just answer your
questions actually, rather than
No, no, no, no, you can, nothing, nothing further.
You can you just reiterate the
point about the remaining loans.
So I didn't quite catch the entirety of the amount.
Uh, so we've got, uh, three remaining loans to the yea,
um, dam and Tasman,
and those loans will be transferred to,
uh, vy, um, C Crown Regional Holdings Limited.
How much are those for? Uh,
there was a 25 million at 10 million and an 18 million.
They just, the, the original loans were 25, um,
and 10, the 10 was a loan for, to fund the environmental,
um, objectives and the, um, river flows.
The Dan and then, uh, during COVID Joseph, they came back
that a few, uh, cost overrun issues.
So we, um, get another 18.
Right. Rachel, lead off.
Thank you. Um, thank you Murray. So I'm the MP for Nelson.
Oh, no, well be, there's no trickery
Here. Murray,
you're clearing your interest.
She, she's kind of the heavy hatters in this committee,
knows her stuff with dams and y me, so. Oh,
Well, I mean, actually,
if I was gonna make an observation, one of the, one
of the challenges, and this is a local, local challenge, is
that Nelson only put five Nelson City only put 5 million in,
um, compared to significant amount
of investment from Crown. Yes.
From Tasman Rapers
and from, um, uh, uh, the wider region, even though it has
a significant benefit for
Nelson in terms of water provision.
But anyway, that's, that's not for you to, uh,
I'm sure we've got some thoughts on that.
Um, look, obviously there were massive cost overruns
with the one year, and so I'm really interested in
what you see as the learnings from the Crown's perspective
in terms of the investment and how the investment was made
and continue to be managed,
and what are the lessons we can take from that.
Because even though the risk was
predominantly placed on Tasman, that's
where the cost has then been born
and pushed out to rate payers with some, you know,
uh, some unhappy rate payers.
And, and rightly so.
I think it's fair, you know,
at the beginning stages when the cost was set, where the
risk profiles were set, you know,
did we get that balance right?
Because my observation is that we are not set up well
as a country to make these types of large scale investments.
And when there is that Crown local government, how can we,
how can we learn from this so
that we don't end up in a y me situation again, in terms
of the blowouts, but we do get the capability
to ensure we can invest at this level because we need to.
Okay. So I'll speak from the Crown's perspective
because, um, you're right,
the benefits have been large.
Um, we structured our financing package so that the risks
that the rate payer, that's important
from the crown's point of view.
Um, and as you know,
the Taman district council have got a full underwrite
on the cost overruns.
So the Crown has not been impacted at all by any of that,
and we're still intact with all our
money and we'll get it back.
Mm-hmm. Um, so that's the first point.
Uh, the second point is, um,
the, the risk profile
when we assessed our lending proposal,
we were aware of, of some of the risks
around the geological Yeah.
Piece. And I think that's public.
Um, and that's why
when we went in to fund the project, we sought
the underwrite from the council cover our risk.
Now, I can't comment for the council as to
how they were thinking about, um, that risk at the time.
But, um, with any, with any project
that involves earthworks, once you start to dig, dig,
whether it's a building dam, whatever,
you're gonna come across issues.
Now, it's how you, it's, it's,
it's the contingency piece in your project managing
and your project financials that you need to get. Right.
Can I just ask the supplementary Rachel on the back of
that, I'm fascinated that, that you make the remark
that you can't speak for the council, surely to goodness,
when it be, when they became cognizant
of the changing nature of the project
and some of the geological challenges,
and they were going to then have to defer
that posture rate payers eventually in the pipeline of,
of the conversation we're now having in the future,
as it were, they would've been aware
that they were gonna shoulder a lot of this.
Surely there was commentary between what the count,
what the, what crown irrigation was doing in terms as an SOE
and what the council was ultimately gonna have to shoulder
if, if the,
because you're due to your remark, the crown, you know, has,
has, has cleared itself of the culpability in the,
in the future, but now the council's got it.
Surely the council would've kicked up when,
when it became evident with, you know,
once the earthworks had begun,
this is gonna cost them and rate,
I think, I think that's my point to Rachel is that, um,
different parties yes.
Whether, whether your equity, debt
rate payer will have a different analysis
and a different approach to
what risks are sitting in the, in the project.
And, and from a effectively a
banker's point of view, which is Yes,
Of course. Exactly. Exactly.
You know, we want our money back. Yes, yes.
And so our risk profile is quite different.
Yes, please. I have another question,
then I go to Joseph's. Yeah.
So Supplementary in
Yeah, so, so on that,
and I think this is the interesting position, right?
Because obviously the Crown has its interests on behalf
of taxpayers, right?
So, but then the challenge I think is, I say
as a parliamentarian, and obviously I have a interest in
my region getting good support from the Crown
and not overburdening my people for something
that has such a large benefit for the country.
I'm just, you may not feel that this is your place
to comment, but is there also not an opportunity
for the Crown to say, well, actually
our interest isn't just in getting our money back from it
investment point of view,
our interest is in building New Zealand
to have the infrastructure it needs.
And so therefore we are willing to take on an element
of the risk because of the benefit.
Because one of the ultimate political risks was that
there could have been a point
where counselors said this blowouts too.
You know, if you had the round wrong counselors
around the table, they could have said,
Yep, I'm out Here. We,
we we're done, we're gonna, this is gonna be left
as a nice half finish wide elephant.
So then, you know, that's, now that didn't happen,
thankfully, but if that had,
there probably then would've been risk to the Crown.
So I'm just thinking about that. What's the,
Um, I think opportunities For the Crown as well. Yeah,
So I think you have to go back to our, yeah.
We were set up as a small entity
that could underwrite demand risk.
Mm. So our role was to make sure
that whatever infrastructure was built was built at a scale
which could deliver the benefits for 50 to a hundred years.
Mm-hmm. So we did. Right.
I, I agree with you that, um, the Crown can take a position
for that future benefit, but that's equity.
Yes. Yep. Okay. Yep.
And so, um, the council
and the community are the equity piece,
and you'll be well aware, Rachel,
that the costs, the costs of
the water are higher than we forecast
because no more equity was put into the project.
So the financing costs have gone up, the costs, the Crown,
the crown's coupon is,
I can't, I'd say it's probably an average of
the environmental loan is zero coupon.
The remainder is probably one point half percent.
So, you know,
we are the chocolate biscuits in the cafeteria when it comes
to trying to remove fos from the crown's point of view,
the financing cost has gone up
because no one's been prepared to put more equity up.
Yeah. By way, by way of an example, we, um, you'll be aware
that with Uri Duntroon, we had to,
um, put them into receivership
for much of the same reason.
And the reason we got them outta receivership was
because people put more equity in,
and once the equity went in, Westpac came in
and refinanced us out.
So we got our capital out
because once the equity was in there was the revenue
covered, the financing costs.
So, so I think you've gotta think
about, there's two lenses here.
From the crown's point of view, it's whether you
are an equity participant.
Yeah. So you we're all aware of the press, you know,
and people saying, oh, you know, we're selling the,
the chorus, da, da da, da.
We're not selling chorus. Chorus is
the same as Crown irrigation.
Chorus is debt. All
that's happening at Chorus is it's been refinanced.
So if you're a debt provider,
it's quite different than the Crown saying, we are gonna,
are gonna fund this from an equity position,
and the project is gonna go and raise capital from Westpac
and a NZ and everyone else. Last, last,
Last. I guess because
these projects are so important.
Do you think this is the, do you think the way CIO was set
up was the best way to support Regions to do these projects?
Or do you think it should have been set up in a way
that both had the financing and some equity potentially,
or some ability to look at those long-term benefits
for, in terms of the Crown?
No, I think, I think it was exactly what the Crown needed.
Yeah. And so, um, we had, we had two roles
we provided, uh, so there's, when, when these projects,
uh, started, you have development capital to get you through
to Financial Close, we
provided development capital as grants.
So we took projects like Central Plains water period, unrun
through to financial close with grants
on a 50 50 basis with other equity providers,
whether they be farmers, councils, whatever.
The role then, as I said
before, was to, was to underwrite the demand risk.
So, um,
the forecasts always include, and,
and a really important part for Crown Irrigation was to say,
we're gonna lend these people $50 million
at a discounted rate.
Um, the command area is 25,000 hectares.
The current irr irritable land
is 10,000 hectare.
So we know there's potential for, for more irritable land,
but also we've got a council
that wants potable water, and they'll pay for that.
And we've got a council
or the community that wants environmental benefits,
increased river flows, and they'll pay for that.
So you, so one is a situation
where you've got three revenue streams,
you've got environmental revenue stream, you've got, um,
potable water revenue stream for the next a hundred years,
and you've got horticulturalists who are paying for water
for crops.
And so I think, I think the model,
I think Crown Irrigation was a, an agile
company that could deliver benefits through
underwriting the demand. Yeah.
The project wouldn't have happened,
Wouldn't, none of the projects we funded would've happened
without us, and, and we wouldn't.
So we funded before we were, um,
before the decision was made
to stop us investing further in projects.
We were funding, I think it was 14 projects
around the country with grant funding to get them
to financial close.
Mike had a supplementary on questions. I'm going, Jason.
Well, yeah, I, um, thanks, chair.
You just mentioned the courier Duntroon scheme.
Why did that run into, um, so many difficulties?
Um,
there was an issue with Reticulation, wasn't it?
No, no. There was an issue with the, um,
between the contractor
and the, uh, sponsor
around the consent.
And effectively what happened was,
without going into a rule of who was
and is that the contractor built, um,
a two meter wide pipe above the ground next
to the, uh, river.
That's right. The consent had that
pipe below the river,
and there was a legal, um, fight over why that happened,
but that basically led to the cost over ring.
And so, so it was reticulated because of that legal dispute?
No, no. That, well, they buried the pipe.
They had, they had to bury the pipe.
That's what I say it was. It was reticulated.
It was below the ground.
Correct. Formally above the ground. Correct.
Okay. Just to sip on that, did, did you have,
did the Crown have enough oversight of what was happening
with that scheme, do you think?
Um, our oversight was basically around making sure
that schemes complied with their, uh,
obligations under the financing agreement
and complied with the environmental
and compliance around the project.
Um, we didn't, we weren't sitting at the table
as an equity provider, so we didn't get involved in project
management or any of any of that.
But we, we were, we got quarterly reports
and were told what was going on, so we knew
what was happening and,
and when it got to the point that the scheme could no longer
fund itself, that's when we, um, appointed
to receive it. Mm-hmm.
Joseph, Thanks. Murray.
Want ask you, um, uh,
basically reflections on lessons learned
through this process that may be useful going forwards?
Um, about three years ago,
I think I was the water spokesperson in opposition,
and I went and visited on construction.
And, um, relying on memory, some
of the things I picked up from that was that a lot
of work had been done to con get ready to, you know,
construct construction and solutions, et cetera.
But it wasn't a lot, a lot of work hadn't been done as well,
but money became available, um,
through the shovel re scheme.
And so it was stood up pretty quickly
Through what scheme?
Uh, shovel re scheme, um, you know, the funding,
funding mechanism to funding?
Yeah. No, there was no funding came from, um, the PGF.
Okay. The only, the only funding that came to YME was
through Crown Irrigation.
Right. Was it, was it,
because my, my recollection there was some, um,
I'm going a couple years now to rely on this, that, uh,
some funding became available reasonably quickly
that hadn't been available.
Not going, wasn't, Wasn't on the horizon? No,
Not that I'm aware of.
Okay. Well, the only funding
that became available was when the scheme through COVID,
um, uh, required some more capital.
And they came to us and we went to the shareholder minister,
because at that point, that might be it.
At that point, the Crown had said, you are not
to fund any more schemes.
Um, we didn't have any capital to give them.
So we came back to the shareholder minister
and said, we've had a inquiry from, um, YEA form of capital.
Right. Would you support it?
And the shareholder minister did.
So we issued another $18 million of, of debt.
So from, from my understanding, the, um, they, they had
to stand up, basically a cap capability
didn't really exist in New Zealand.
Um, not, not a lot of, well,
there had been no major dams built decades
Since, uh, the Clyde Dam, I think.
Yeah. Which is part of my region.
Um, and,
and, um, so, so that was a real challenge to, to stand up
that capability and get the expertise.
And with that comes cost implications. That's what I did.
Um, and then there's a challenge
and of a lack of future projects in the horizon
that are likely to happen.
Yeah. So therefore the pipeline of work isn't there.
And so retaining that capability is basically not possible.
So it's, yeah. So basically get back overseas, uh,
with the skills that they've learned.
Mm-hmm. Um, so, so I'm interested in
what lessons we can learn from us in terms
of other produces, like you,
the Rufa is a full stand down my way.
There's a whole lot of other, which are country
full stand is one of my passions.
Um, challenging one, but, uh,
but it's, you know, there's a whole lot around the country,
but we, we capture the capture more
of our water is in a changing climate so
that we can ensure we have that security water supply and,
and other things, um, build that capability
and retain that capability over time.
But there's, that, that pre-work,
I think you're saying there's the development capital, um,
to enable that pre-work.
That's the hard getting, getting that. So
That, I think that's my point.
You know, um, when I said before we were funding 14
or 16 schemes, had we remained in place,
that capability would've, you know,
if we would've done other, other
projects would've been in the pipeline.
We had, we, we had, we had,
We Had, um, a number of, a number of projects.
But once, once the funding, once that funding was stopped,
all those projects fell away.
Herrani fell away. Um,
ones in the South Canada area fell away.
Yeah. Okay. S Bay fell away. Um, sorry, Mike.
I I think the one in, I think the one in Northland got
funded by maybe the PG f Mm.
Um, but unless you've got a, unless you've got an entity,
and that's, that's probably the, the biggest lesson.
Unless you've got an entity that has got some capital
to underwrite, but to fund some development funding
and then to underwrite some demand risk, um,
you're gonna struggle to get the economic benefit
because you're not gonna get the scale.
You know, central Plains Water is a great example.
I dates, I might get dates, right.
But we funded that. Oh, I'll
Come to you, Steve. Yeah. And
I think within
four years we've been refinanced out.
And why is that? Because the command area went from X
to x plus Y, the scheme has so much more revenue
that Westpac came along and said, we'll fund it.
Thank you very much. Here's a check for the crown.
So you, once you've got that cycle running
and you've got a stream of projects,
you can recycle your capital,
but we wouldn't have needed any more capital.
Right. Um, you know,
we recycled the capital back to the crown.
The only reason we we're probably not recycling the YME
capital is because they haven't sold anymore, uh,
water in the district.
Su you had a something then I got a, um,
Oh, it was a while ago. I was
fascinated about you talking about the two meter pipe
that was built above the ground instead of below the ground,
and then had to be put below the ground.
And you mentioned that part of your remit was,
um, uh, compliance.
So did, did the, did the contractor do that
'cause it was cheaper or something?
Or were you overseeing the compliance?
Like no one noticed that it was,
that no one at some point noticed
that the plans obviously set underground,
but they put it above ground
Or No, our, our compliance was purely, uh,
the compliance I'm talking about is,
is purely the environmental compliance.
So that the scheme had to, um, meet all the local
regulatory compliance around water flow and testing.
Right. Oh, okay. I'm
Not talking, not so much the,
I'm talking about project compliance.
No project compliance. Okay.
So that was the purely the responsibility, the contractor.
Yes. Yeah. It just seems quite bizarre, isn't it?
That haven't, but anyway, thank you.
Very disappointing that it
Happens, Steve.
Sorry, I I offer that.
You Google it
and you'll see a picture of the pipe
above the ground and you'll shake your head.
That's that someone didn't at some point
Say, oh, well this is, well this is really dumb.
Right. Steve had a question. And, uh, Joseph, thank you.
Have a, do you have a supplementary primary? Primary? Okay.
Okay. Steve, Joseph, Mike, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm slightly changing tech,
Uh, but Central Plain's Water, um,
I think it is very well articulated that the Crown
played a vital role in getting that off the ground.
What is the Crown's liability for the consequences of
the dairy intensification that Central Plains Water helped
to facilitate in so far
as we now have a major problem in Canterbury
with nitrate pollution of rivers
and contamination of drinking water.
That wouldn't have happened.
Were not for that extent of intens patching.
The Crown played a vital part in facilitating that
through irrigation,
The crown has no liability,
and the scheme has met all the environmental requirements
of the local regional council. Yes.
So in terms of your assessment of the credability
of the regional council's, um, projections for
what the impact of an irrigation scheme would be,
you take it on, um, face value,
you accept the regional council's evaluations
of the long term environmental effects of,
We, we accept that the sponsor for the scheme has met
environment canterbury's, uh, regulatory requirements.
But you take no further, uh, due diligence on whether, uh,
No, it's not ours. Neither
of those are considerations based on
scientific facts.
Last question wasn't our wasn't not in their mandate.
Yeah. Your mandate's purely to provide finance litigation
Funding like a bank. Yep.
Um, and so the liability ground, uh, for example,
the regional councils declared a nitrate
emergency down there.
Um, and the cost of health impacts
and water decontamination costs, um,
the significant ecological costs,
because nitrates very bad for the ecology of rivers at lakes
as well, are all gonna be born
by either the rate payer or the crown.
And that's what the way it comes back
to the crown, ultimately.
So it comes back to my conversation
before about equity and debt.
The, the, the,
the liability comes back to the equity holder.
Yeah. Not to the debt holder.
Yeah. But again, so
The equity holder in this case is,
so are you inferring
More, more an ethical question then, Steve?
What is the ethical requirements
of the crown when it becomes a, a loaning entity or
It's ethical, but it's also,
it's a real world cost, isn't it?
Because if we are having a hundred deaths annually from
bowel cancer attributable to nitrate
and drinking water best available
Best, We'll have that as a
Final question. And
Murray can answer that.
Can I just finish my response to you? Yes, of course.
It's not merely an ethical consideration,
practical cost, isn't it?
And if, um, if the sell one district have to pay
$300 million for a nitrate, um,
removal system so that they can have drinking water
for their local region, um,
it is a real world economic cost. And actually, in a sense,
I would say to you, I would say so.
Can please let Mario answer that.
I would say to you that when the so
and district area mm-hmm.
Made the decision to support the scheme Yeah.
Within their risk management profile.
Yeah. They should have had nitrates
and they should have said, if nitrates are gonna go
up, how are we gonna deal with them?
Yeah. It's gonna cost us 300 million. Yeah.
Put that into the financial model
and go, actually we won't build it
because there's a $300 million risk.
Yeah. It's got nothing.
It's not, it's not a debt provider's position
Very quickly.
Isn't there a problem given the massively small
resourced character of district councils
and Tasman districts are an example in point in regard
to yea that the biggest player in the room,
the crown, though, your contribution as a percentage
of the total cost might be relatively small
with the resources to do more substantive assessments on
that basis, is entirely relying
on these very small district councils to do that extent
of due diligence, which is just not practical
for 'em to be able to do.
Nor would they have the, uh, finances to do it,
nor would they often have the expertise to do it.
I mean, we've just had a local council election
and very, it is often very hard to find people even
to put on their local council.
So, um, it is this,
at this point, it is an ethical question.
Is the crown, um,
leaving all the burden on Tasman,
leaving all the burden on the local councils, is somewhat,
uh, not doing its duty of care
To the greater Good of the community,
even if they're facilitating these big irrigation schemes
To wind up. Steve, please.
Do you know what I mean? I mean,
do you see what I'm getting at?
No, I I, I see what you're getting at.
But actually responsibility needs to fall with the people
that decide to build these things, not the lender.
Right. So responsibility needs to fall with the, and
and when you say they're not resourced, you know,
I had a staff of five people Lending capital.
The councils have got environmental departments,
they've got all sorts of people to opine on
what that water's gonna do.
And if I go back to Yea, the best thing about yea is
that the aquifer's being recharged, the river gets
first in a, in, in the, in the,
in the waterfall for water before the potable
and the, and the farmer.
So in that case, the, the Tasman district council
and Nelson City made a decision
that is the most important thing
to make sure the water's clean so
that they've done their risk assessment
and they won't have the water issues, I'm sure.
I don't know, but IIII contest that
they don't have the capability.
They've got the capability environment Canterbury.
Environment Canterbury has got
A lot of people Sure. Litigate this.
Sorry, sorry. On Yes, you do. Go, uh, Joseph. Sorry. So
I visited Central Plains a few years ago,
and Steve, you hadn't already.
Yeah. So, um, well, you, you may, you may know this, I, I,
again, a few years I to rely on memory, which maybe,
you know, like to be, but you know,
but from, from my recollection, they could actually, um, uh,
identify and map the ecological characteristics
Across The entire area
that they have, you know, members of.
So that's a, it's a very big part of the, of the water have
to water aquifer and, and,
and they can manage the nitrate, um, you know,
across rather, rather than just looking at individual farm
base, manage that across the entire network.
Uh, so that means there's actually a much more
sophisticated analysis.
It is sophisticated management of those risk factors
that Steve was referring to than you would
otherwise have then maybe a small council
would, would, would be able to
Achieve. It is sophisticated
and the requirements placed on the
end user for farm management plans, et cetera, et cetera.
And, um, the quantums of, uh,
nitrates that they're using on their properties is very well
monitored so that the environment Canterbury are the ones,
are the key people to assess that. No one else.
Mm. I I think what Steve was inferring,
is this a social license as a lender, um, in this moment
to say, Hey, well look, we are the, um,
opportunity for you given that we are the lender to,
to grow this reality.
But social license would decree
and along things that you've just inferred that maybe
that the money should never have been offered.
No, it's not even that.
I mean, I think it's social license,
but it also a practical consequence of a,
Uh, An industrial project is, um, you know,
How do you so negatives and
Positives, negative, you know, and yeah.
And I think, uh, it becomes ultimately a national problem.
And I think it'll lose a little bit to
what Rachel was saying, if why me,
and I'm not contesting it either way,
is such a fantastic boon to the country.
Um, is it fair that we make the Tasman
district rate payer bear so much of the burden for it?
And shouldn't the crown as we previously would've done
bear a greater burden for it?
If we think about other dam infrastructure in our history,
the crown took the lion's share of the cost of it.
In fact, the total cost of it,
in most instances, yes. But it was
To produce electricity Ity.
So the difference here is all the benefits
Are born by the local in terms of water are
Falling to the rate payer.
Yes. But in a sense, I think there's a problem
of infrastructure, isn't there because,
Well, that's a wider conversation because
To Rachel's point about we at that moment,
that council decided to do it,
but they would've been well within their, um, sensible minds
to say, this is a wildly impossible investment for us
to afford, so we're not gonna do it.
And, and at that point, doesn't the Crown have an obligation
to think about the greater good of the country?
And yes, there might be local benefit.
And, and that's, that's my point.
The Crown then becomes an equity
pro provider, not a debt provider.
That's a different discussion. It's a totally
Different discussion
where, where you mentioned that before,
Right. Yeah.
So yeah, I get it. Okay.
Sue Sue's, uh, Mike, then Joseph,
I've Just got a couple And
the order Quick general question.
Sorry. Hey, I was just wondering about the implications
of the two, 2017 changes when you changed from, um,
investment or origination to investment management.
What the implications that that were,
and then, oh, then I'll ask that one.
I've just got a quick follow up.
Uh, the implications were
that we became, we were just managing,
Managing what was there already.
Managing the assets, the new Yeah, yeah.
Reduced our costs. Just basically got the company.
So it was just looking after the, the loans we'd issued.
Okay. Yeah. And then in terms of where you are now,
what lessons do you think you've learned
and what would you like the legacy of the,
of the initiative to be?
As I said before, I think the biggest lesson is that
if you've, if if the Crown is intent on providing economic
growth through the use of water
or any, any infrastructure, then to have a small,
uh, agile company that has got a single focus,
not, not water and electricity
and something else, just water.
Um, I think it, I think that's
how you get your pipeline.
Um, you're not, as we've demonstrated, you are,
you are recycling capital.
So it's, it's not a situation where people say, oh,
they gave central plans water $80 million
and we've now got a nitrate problem.
Um, the crown was in there
with equity, what's going on here?
And, and exposing yourself as an equity provider
to cost overruns.
So I think it's a, it's a very elegant way of making sure
that you deliver the right scale
for the future without taking undue risk
for the on the crown's balance sheet. Well,
Very quickly supplementary to that,
do you think we've got a lack
of capability plan projections forward in this moment?
Because as a lender, as you said, the Crown wants
to square up its books as, as is, as cleanly
and as clearly and as quickly as conceivably possible.
Um, and I go back to you,
your question about lessons learned.
Well, is it a case of, you know, from the Crown's
position and any perceived risk exposure that
we just don't have the capability plans to project out 20,
30 years in advance of what a coronial
or crown investment would strategically look like?
No, but I think if you go back to the, um,
when Crown Irrigation was set up, the decision was made that
water is critical to economic growth.
Yes, of course. Right.
Once you, once, once that decision's made
and you provide capital, then it,
it flows down to the regions Yeah.
To do their own projects.
So I don't think it's a command
and control thing from the center for, for the Crown to say,
um, pull that lever, we'll give falls damn $10 million
because we think that's important mm-hmm.
That the, the local community needs to assess the risks
and the development and the crown can come in
underneath fund for that either demand risk or whatever.
I just think that just early remarks that a lot
of the time local government was not cognizant
of the risk profile
and would say, yeah, great, we get a new dam
and we are partnering with the Crown
to get the necessary fund to get it out. Oh,
I think that's right. That's valid.
But I think the, the important thing is
that the local councils understand the potable water piece.
Oh yeah. Absolutely. Particularly on the east coast
of New Zealand, you know, from top to bottom, they know that
it's getting harder and harder
and to provide water to their rate payers,
they're gonna need to store somehow, somewhere.
And unless someone steps in
and says, we'll, underwrite that, that demand risk so
that you build a storage facility
that can survive a hundred years
of growth in the horse bay
or wherever, then you're gonna get subscale outcomes.
And that's why, and I think that's why to, um,
to Steve's point, you know, all
of us have probably flown over the Canterbury plains
and what do you see two hectare, three hectare
ponds, why farmers put those on their farms
water resilience mm-hmm.
Rather than having scale somewhere with one entity
that's delivering water to all of them.
They've all built their own ponds. Very fair statement. Um,
Su did you have a supple mind?
Oh, yeah. So I'm just saying that in terms,
so you're saying essentially that in terms
of return on investment, you thought that, that you think
that the, um, small agile company
with a single focus is the best way to manage.
Yeah, I think that's right. Because you
don't have any distractions.
You're only focus, we were only focused on water.
No, you, you clarified that really well.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, Murray, just some of those, um, schemes
that we're talking about that were in pipeline,
we had a couple of the, um,
and Waka mocha, we, we mastered them.
Oh, yes, yes. I was involved in both of those. Yeah.
Um, how did you factor in the risks
to RMA interpretations or changes
and both of those projects were actually stymied
because of RMA stuff.
Guam Moia 2017 was consentable by 2020.
It wasn't because the greater Wellington Regional Council
deemed it a prohibited activity to a,
do anything in a wetland and b do anything in a water body.
And last time I looked to build a dam in a
gully not on the top of the hill.
Um, and, and so how did, how did you factor that risk in?
Well, once again, that was, um, for us,
we, we weren't writing a check until
that had been dealt with.
So that risk labeled the sponsor answer the, the,
we did consider it when we were doing the grant funding.
Um, and it's like any, it's, when you look at any project,
um, you need to have options A, B, and C, not just option A.
And I think sometimes, um, in New Zealand, we,
we focus on option A without thinking if
that happens, what are we gonna do?
So we, we were cognizant
of those risks from the grant funding,
but they weren't, we, we never took on that risk,
um, by providing a debt position.
Yeah. So, so we, if that came to fruition, which it didn't,
we didn't fund it, but we did fund, yes,
we did give grant funding to the war,
and we did give grant funding to the RO fund.
Yeah. And that's really what I was referring to.
You know, at the time you give grant funding,
it's permitted activity, everyone's on board,
and then it's effectively buy, buy grant funding
because, um,
there's been a different interpretation of the RMA.
It's no longer permitted activity,
And that's a risk. And it
Comes to screaming hot, We've
Still got no water, Joseph, so
wanna throw another curly one?
Um, and look, there's, uh, think from the top to bottom,
we need more water storage.
Um, in the cushion it goes the, my
Question around capability planning, um,
development capital, et cetera.
But, um, you, you made the point earlier about, you know,
we need to plan for a century
and then, you know, think about
what we need for that century.
Um, so my colleague, miles Anderson
represent Central Otago has got part of it,
but I've got, I've got actually a lot of water scams
that feed into this part of the country
and that feed into mine.
Um, and they, they're at that point
that they all plan build century ago.
And we're now, you know, C'S up, um,
and you're probably aware of this
and it's not in your wheelhouse directly
that I'm interested in any,
any thinking you have around this.
'cause um, it's the driest part of the country.
Water is critical. Uh, we have these thin wall dams
that are about a century old mm-hmm.
Through into great depression some bit earlier.
Um, they, they're getting the end of life
and, um, the,
the crown divested itself from 'em few days ago.
Um, but then there's the issue of, okay, yeah, they,
they have return economic benefits, social benefits,
you know, um, but now there's a development capital
issue to replace them and it doesn't stack up, but in
and of itself, so Interesting.
Any, any thoughts you have on, on, it's
A very contentious area because I
Know Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Um, do you Yeah,
that's stack up a thought was priced right.
That is very contentious.
A lot of people, that's all I'll say. Okay.
If there was revenue coming off that water,
people would build dams.
Well, Alex is a classic example. Jess,
Let's, that's Yeah, that's my, yeah.
You know, but, but it's tricky
because in your instance, falls, dams instance,
the guys at the top of the valley, they'd been, you know,
watering grass, sheep had quite a different attitude
to people down the bottom of the valley in the man care.
That's correct. Yeah. And I went to many a meeting
where a hundred percent
No. So,
and I might, if I could just sneak in,
certainly can, not precisely.
But it's, if you had the opportunity, again, with, with this
ion on the scheme, what are the,
what are the good things you'd pick out of it in any,
in any thing you would change if you had had time?
Again,
I think the good things are that you, um, you have to have
an entity that is, uh, involved from
the start to the financial close.
I don't know whether you're all aware of the history of, um,
the development funding piece,
but when we were set up, the development funding sat
inside NM PI, it was called
the Irrigation Acceleration Fund.
That's right. And we were,
we were established with construction capital.
But, um, I went to the shareholder minister
and said this, this is basically not working
because we've got no oversight of the development piece.
And because we don't know what's going on, we don't,
we can't fund the pipeline.
So you need to think about combining the two entities.
So the shareholder Mrs at the time, um, decided to put the,
develop the funding piece into Crown irrigation,
that made a huge difference.
Massive difference. Murray,
Can I just touch on something you just said?
Can you repeat that? You said the prior model
wasn't fit for purpose, you said it's not working
because you didn't have oversight
of the construction piece. Is that No,
The development funded piece.
The development funding piece. Okay. I just want to
Clarify that. So
NPI had a bucket of money where they would go out
and provide full grant funding, not 50 50.
Mm-hmm. And we sat over here waiting for, waiting for NPI
to get them to a, to um,
the final investment decision.
Right. But there was, there was,
Okay. Okay.
I just found it was in contradiction
to an earlier remark, but I you've clarified it. So was
There, was there any, any sort of thing you you'd pick out
that didn't work well, you'd change if you had the time?
Again,
it's good question, but I, I think we were, we were, so
our, our mandate was so focused, so narrow
and focused that it wasn't something that, um,
I'd consider broadening.
So I, I think once you start to broaden
and get outside of your wheelhouse,
then mm, you have problems.
So can't, I can't think of anything off the top
of my head that I'd recommend.
So in terms of what works well, it was just, is
that key thing from the start to that to the al close as
that as the key Yes.
Enablement. Yeah. Yeah.
And, and one of our key roles was to help, um, being able,
was seen in our KPIs was to make sure that we helped,
we got close to the sponsors
and the equity holders to help 'em understand
how the funding was gonna work.
You know, what our role was coming in, we did,
we did most of the, we probably did all the analysis on the
demand side 'cause that was critical to our lending.
So we were able to help him say, look, um, this is your,
your, your current demand.
We think forecasting forward, you're gonna have X,
therefore your scheme can be built this big da da.
We went through it with them like that. Cheers.
Alright, team, we have ma
for 10 more minutes if there's anyone questions,
otherwise we can wrap up any further questions.
No, no, no. Mine very well. Thank you very much.
It's been a journey. Sounds like. I know.
It must be quite sad. Is it? Yeah.
It's quite sad. I think Mike has
Another question. I've probably got one.
Mary. I mean,
you mentioned earlier about it's not your,
it wasn't your role to go
and say, Hey, we should build a down here, here,
here, here, here.
You know, the communities have they gotta come to you
and say, this is what we wanna do.
Do you think there was, there's a missed opportunity there
to better link up in terms of strategic,
you know, national interests.
Think about what a pipeline would look like.
I mean, because we know if we look at the climatic modeling,
um, you know, that could be one degree shift, six months
moisture stress on the east coast
of both islands particularly.
Um, and you know, rather than sort of sitting around going,
oh, well, we'll wait for them to come to us.
Was there an opportunity to do that better?
And everybody get in a room
and say, what is a 30, 40 year strategic pipeline look like?
That's sort of central control.
Again, um, I mean, I come from your area,
uh, and you'll know the history that
when you've got mastered in ton south,
da dah dah da, very hard to get them to agree on
what should be the outcome for the water.
Mm-hmm. Very good one. And, and yeah.
Who pays for what? And I think mastered
and spent quite a lot of money trying to upgrade their
water storage north of Masterton.
Yeah. They could have been part of a, a scheme where
that money could have gone towards the dam.
Yep. That's got three days water storage mastered and has.
But, um, but probably more not saying this is
what you should do, but this is what good could look like.
'cause I was also grew up in Canterbury. Um, yeah.
You know, so I've seen the benefits of water
and it was interesting hearing Rachel say, you know,
how she's thrilled about the economic benefit that Yme has,
um, provided to the region, which is great.
We sort of know this, but we haven't really planned anything
where it's just been a talk fest for decades.
And we have the new, um,
the environmental flow component is now,
which is quite new in terms of water storage, um, you know,
which adds benefits to the environment.
Yeah. So it comes back to the, the,
the scheme Rachel's involved with us.
The, there's a number of benef benefactors.
There's, there's the agricultural piece.
That's, to me that's, that's not as big
as the potable and the environmental piece.
Um, if you can't combine all three mm-hmm.
I don't think you'll be, you, you have in New Zealand
currently, you won't have a successful scheme.
You need to be able to demonstrate the
environmental benefits.
You need to be able to deliver water to the communities
that need it on the East Coast.
Um, and then you need to be able
to deliver the economic benefits
that the farmers are gonna deliver.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Which is a shame about the water schemes in, in Haws Bay.
I was just thinking that.
It's a very good statement actually. Yeah.
And I, you may not be able to answer,
but you think, um, potential changes in the RMA could
actually facilitate some of that.
Alleviate a, some of the costs which are significant
and the time delays.
Is there potential to get that right or better?
I, I know enough to be dangerous here,
but I think, I think there's always,
people have always got respect to the courts.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Exactly.
Uh, Joseph, and then we are done. And,
And, and Rut is a classic example.
They went to the Supreme Court
Yeah. Which
Is about getting the, the enabling legislation
fit for purpose one
Under, Whereas Mir was a private Members's bill Yeah.
To deliver the land. Yep. For the scheme,
I thought, Nope, you need, um, so,
So we've just gotta get that legislation
that open stuff, but Right.
You, you may have, you may have kind
of answered my question there, but, uh,
but the, there was a flow, flow on effectively as Yeah.
What, what, what learnings can, can we take as legislators
and as communities I guess out of, out
of YB has been successful, Tana's trying, been trying to get
that one solved for years.
And it's, there is that environmental piece,
the I potable piece and the, you know, the irrigation piece.
And then same thing with Falls Dam.
You know, it's, it's, it's,
it's again been building away for years,
But I, I'd imagine the people in,
in the district in Hawkes Bay around Ruan, uh,
look at Yme and go, why did we not go down that route
with a private members building?
Yes, yes. I control the land. Had meetings about
Then would never have gone to the Supreme Court.
Yeah. Yeah.
Had meetings with, with local counselors over introduction
to private members bill issues in haw
Spain. Thank you, Murray.
That's all right. Thank you. Always good to see you.
Very grateful for your time. We're five minutes early.